\reading{Thomas Hobbes, \emph{Leviathan}}
\readingcite{pp. 188-190 (Oxford 1909) [1651]}

The NUTRITION of a Common-wealth consisteth, in the \textit{Plenty}, and
\textit{Distribution} of \textit{Materials} conducing to Life: In
\textit{Concoction}, or \textit{Preparation}; and (when concocted) in the
\textit{Conveyance} of it, by convenient conduits, to the Publique use.

\ldots The Distribution of the Materials of this Nourishment, is the
constitution of \textit{Mine}, and \textit{Thine}, and \textit{His}, that is to
say, in one word \textit{Propriety}; and belongeth in all kinds of Common-wealth
to the Soveraign Power. For where there is no Common-wealth, there is, (as hath
been already shewn) a perpetuall warre of every man against his neighbour; And
therefore every thing is his that getteth it, and keepeth it by force; which is
neither \textit{Propriety} nor \textit{Community}; but
\textit{Uncertainty}.\ldots Seeing therefore the Introduction of
\textit{Propriety} is an effect of Common-wealth; which can do nothing but by
the Person that Represents it, it is the act onely of the Soveraign; and
consisteth in the Lawes, which none can make that have not the Soveraign Power.
And this they well knew of old, who called that \textit{$N$\'o$\mu $o$\varsigma
$}, (that is to say, \textit{Distribution},) which we call Law; and defined
Justice, by \textit{distributing} to every man \textit{his own}. 

\ldots In this Distribution, the First Law, is for Division of the Land it
selfe: wherein the Soveraign assigneth to every man a portion, according as he,
and not according as any Subject, or any number of them, shall judge agreeable
to Equity, and the Common Good.\ldots And though a People comming into
possession of a land by warre, do not alwaies exterminate the antient
Inhabitants\ldots but leave to many, or most, or all of them their Estates; yet
it is manifest they hold them afterwards, as of the Victors distribution; as the
people of \textit{England} held all theirs of \textit{William the Conquerour}.

