\reading{New York Real Property Law}

\readinghead{\S 258 -- Short forms of deeds and mortgages.}

The use of the following forms of instruments for the conveyance and mortgage of
real property is lawful, but this section does not prevent or invalidate the
use of other forms: 

\readinghead{Statutory Form A (Individual)}

\readinghead{DEED WITH FULL COVENANTS.}

This indenture, made the ...... day of ........ nineteen hundred  and ......,
between .............(insert residence) party of the first part, and
.............. (insert residence) party of the second part, 

Witnesseth, that the party of the first part, in consideration of ............
dollars, lawful money of the United States, paid by the party of the second
part, does hereby grant and release unto the party of the second part,
........... and assigns forever, all ......... (description), together with the
appurtenances and all the estate and rights of the party of the first part in
and to said premises, 

To have and to hold the premises herein granted unto the party of the second
part, ............ and assigns forever. And said ............ covenants as
follows: 

First. That said ............ is seized of said premises in fee simple, and has
good right to convey the same; 

Second. That the party of the second part shall quietly enjoy the said premises;


Third. That the said premises are free from incumbrances; 

Fourth. That the party of the first part will execute or procure any further
necessary assurance of the title to said premises; 

Fifth. That said ............ will forever warrant the title to said premises. 

In witness whereof, the party of the first part has hereunto set his hand and
seal the day and year first above written. 

In presence of:

\readinghead{Statutory Form D. (Individual)}

\readinghead{QUITCLAIM DEED.}

This indenture, made the ....... day of ..........., nineteen hundred  and
.........., between ..............., (insert residence), party of the first
part, and .............., (insert residence), party of the second part: 

Witnesseth, that the party of the first part, in consideration of ...........
dollars, lawful money of the United States, paid by the party of the second
part, does hereby remise, release, and quitclaim unto the party of the second
part, ............... and assigns forever, all (description), together with the
appurtenances and all the estate and rights of the party of the first part in
and to said premises. 

To have and to hold the premises herein granted unto the party of the second
part, ............ and assigns forever. 

In witness whereof, the party of the first part has hereunto set his hand and
seal the day and year first above written. 

In presence of: 

