\reading{Ladue, Missouri Zoning Ordinance}
\readingcite{Ordinance 1175, as amended through Feb.~2016,
\url{https://web.archive.org/web/20160607011905/http://www.cityofladue-mo.gov/mm/files/ZoningOrd1175.pdf}}

\ldots II. A. (10) The only uses permitted within the City of Ladue are those
specifically listed in this Zoning Ordinance. Notwithstanding, the following
uses are expressly prohibited within any Zoning district:
\begin{statute}
\item (a) Multiple-family dwellings and condominiums

\item (b) Multi-level parking structures

\item (c) Automotive sales

\item (d) Drive-through auto washing facilities

\item (e) Funeral homes

\item (f) Massage parlors

\item (g) Commercial pool parlors and game rooms

\item (h) Nursing homes.

\item (i) Hospitals

\item (j) Motels
\end{statute}


\captionedgraphic{zoning-img005}{Diagram of required setbacks between the
property line and the buildable area, according to Ladue's zoning ordinance.}

\ldots IV.A.(4)(d) An accessory building or structure may not be used for
dwelling purposes except as living accommodations for persons employed for
domestic or related services to a resident of the main building.

(e) No vehicle whether automotive or a trailer, mobile home or similar item,
whether supported by wheels or with wheels removed, shall be kept or used in
this city for temporary or permanent living purposes\ldots.

[The ordinance goes on to impose substantial off-street parking requirements for
all homes and businesses and to regulate, among other things, the appearance of
driveway monuments, the height of driveway gates, and the amount of space that
must be visible between the bars of such gates.]

\ldots.

VI.A.H.4. No commercial vehicle shall be parked on residentially-zoned land
except such vehicles temporarily parked on a lot for purpose of providing
permitted construction, or for maintenance or other contracted services\ldots.
Vehicles engaged in maintenance or other contracted services may not remain on
the site for more than 7 calendar days and must be moved from the site within 24
hours of job completion.

\ldots.

VII.E.3. [Oversized houses may be allowed by special permit. For all oversized
houses, there must be at least 10 square feet of lot for every square foot of
house, and the footprint of the house can't cover more than 10\% of the lot.]
